---
title: Survival in the Wilderness
---

## Rests

For every day an adventurer does not use the *short rest*
feature, they gain one level of fatigue.

### Short rests

*These lands are perilous, it is fairly uncommon for the knight to close an eye*

Short rests require at least 8h to complete. Camping for the
night or sleeping at an inn are typically considered short
rests. During a short rest, an adventurer may spend hit die
to heal. Hit die replenish during long rests. Spending at
least 2 hit die removes one level of fatigue (note that
spending more hit die does not remove extra levels).

### Long rests

Long rests require a period of at least a week. A long rest
can be broken up by menial tasks that do not require intense
physical or mental labor without canceling its effects.
Taking damage cancels the long rest. For every week spent
resting, you regain 2 hit die. At the end of the rest, you
roll and add your current hit die to your current health,
without consuming the hit die. Long rests by themselves
remove one level of fatigue per week spent resting. Each day
of the long rest is considered a short rest, meaning you can
consume hit die and remove fatigue levels (if you consume at
least 2).

### Rest interruptions 

*The cold grasp of death lingered on the knight's throat as
she fell into a shallow slumber. Her brief rest, however,
was swiftly interrupted...*

Interrupted rests do not count as rests, they do no remove
fatigue levels and grant one level of fatigue, no matter how
many hit die were used. However, they still grant health on
hit dice used.

Short or long rests in designated safe areas (such as an
Inn, but these are determined by the DM) cannot be
interrupted by random encounters. The safety level of an
area is determined by the DM (eg. an area might just be safe
enough for a brief rest, but not safe for a week long one)

#### Random encounters

Every rest (unless in an area that is safe for the rest's
duration) the players or DM roll a  `d4`. Depending on how
hostile the area is, rolling below a certain number triggers
a random encounter that interrupts the players' rest (eg.
rolling below 4 in a mostly hostile area could trigger an
encounter, while the same effect would be tied to rolling
below 2 in a mostly safe area). The exact encounter is
determined by the DM. This book does not include these
encounters, as it is recommended to tailor them to your
campaign, setting, context and players, however, you can
take any of these encounters as an example.

##### Mad peasants ambush

The players are awakened by an ambush of madmen, here to
steal, kill and so on. They orchestrate an elaborate trap.
Some of the players could wake up tied and unable to move.
Some of the peasants could be hiding away in a bush, waiting
for the perfect moment to backstab. The peasants could keep
a high ground advantage, pushing a massive object such as a
boulder from a tree or small hill, crushing one or more
players.

##### Weird stranger 

A weird stranger emerges from the darkness. Be it a
wandering bard or merchant, a hunter or a nobleman, they
would act peaceful towards the players. The stranger could
either remain peaceful for the encounter, not counting as an
interrupt (this could happen if the roll was on a safe
number, but you want to keep the players guessing) or they
could plan to assassinate the players, call for
reinforcements, become possessed, show their true identity
as a vile creature or whatever else.